STETECH1

URGENT
	Show game name on JME options form
	Players starting on top of each other?
	Remove settings from UndercoverAgentStaticData
	Config files!
Load models from jar file
Clear client-only entities at the start of the game
Show "winner"/"loser" at end
Show "hit!" if a player hit
Simulate packet loss and delay from client to server
Show on hud "connecting to server.." etc...
	Upload to Digital Ocean
Search for todos


TODO
Write code to add 100 clients instantly
Upload gif to Twitter -https://www.onlineconverter.com/avi-to-gif
Falling snow - started
Pause game time if not enough players
Server tell client to slow down if server struggling
Try desert models
Sometimes, first bullet not killing snowman - is server also shooting? Client send shot confirmed msg to server when bullet is launched?
Warn if client and server have diff bullets left
Use model woman
Find sound effects
Add client ping time to bullet ffwd
Implement EntityNotFound message for entities that we still don't know about 10 seconds later
Why doesn't player slide along snowmen?
Add open-source msg to the top of all files
Record desktop showing two players
Blog post progress
Client can always jump, even when in the air
Client connect to lobby first, then select server
Players send ping to server from lobby to see which is best
Sound Effect message
Ping system
Split up client/server into systems
Try diff snow hills
Tree - make serverside just a cyl on trunk
Get tileable snow tex
Hitscan rifle - show line showing where server says bullet went
Laser bullets
Animate backwards when walking backwards
Create moonbase map
Look for soldiers for Moonbase Assault
Simple console GUI for connecting to lobby
Check for packet loss
Server queue players, spectators
Games - "powered by SteveTech"
Add Features to readme
Should not have a generic "process()" or preprocess() method?
Walking up steps
Game config interface
Physics test - do explosion
Add lots of comments
Create generic classes and test them
Make vars private/protected
Reduce object creation, including calls to clone()
Kryonet encryption?
User enter name


LATER
Check messages receive in incorrect order won't affect the game
Use gradle for libraries
Use latest JME libs
Simple physics - pushing
Don't use broadcast()?s
Kick players who don't move
Use tpf to ensure clients/server run at same speed
Stop client if no comms for a while
Only send entity messages to players that have joined the game


